# Firebase Functions Python SDK

## Requirements

- Python 3.9 or higher.
- Pip (usually installed alongside Python).

## Usage

Install virtual environment `virtualenv` if you already haven't by going through this guide.
It makes it a lot easier to keep Python dependencies and modules isolated from the rest
of your environment.

```
pip install --user virtualenv --python=3.9

# After this you might have to add the virtualenv binary
# to your $PATH.
```

1.  Start by creating a virtual environment in your project directory.
    > **Note**
    > The minumum supported Python version is **3.9**.
        ```
        python3.9 -m venv .env
        ```
2.  Activate the virtual environment you just created.
    ```
    source .env/bin/activate
    ```

## Development setup

Clone this repo and install the requirements.

## Running the example

- `firebase_functions` contains the experimental Functions SDK for Python.
  ```
  python setup.py install
  ```
- Install the requirements.
  ```
  pip install -r requirements.txt
  ```
- Activate virtual environment:
  ```
  source venv/bin/activate
  ```
- `sample.py` contains some sample user code written using the Functions SDK.

- Run the codegen tool to generate an entrypoint. Save the output to a new
  `app.py` file.
  ```
  python src/firebase_functions/codegen.py sample/main.py > sample/__pycache__/autogenerated.py
  ```
- Start the Flask server to serve the generated entrypoint.
  ```
  gunicorn -b localhost:8080 __pycache__.autogenerated:app
  ```
- Start a separate server to serve the `functions.yaml`.
  ```
  gunicorn -b localhost:8081 __pycache__.autogenerated:admin
  ```
- To trigger the HTTP REQUEST function:
  ```
  curl localhost:8080/http_request_function
  ```
- To trigger the HTTP CALL function:
  ```
    curl --header "Content-Type: application/json" \
    --header "Authorization: Bearer fgffff" \
  --request POST \
  --data '{"data": {"username": "xyz"}, "username":"xyz","password":"xyz"}' \
    localhost:8080/http_callable_function
  ```
- To trigger the PubSub function:

  ```
  curl -X POST -d '{"uid": "alice"}' localhost:8080/pubsub_function
  ```

- To get the discovery yaml (currently served on the same port):
  ```
  curl localhost:8081/__/functions.yaml
  ```

## Running the tests

Setup project;

```
python setup.py install
```

Install the requirements:

```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Activate virtual environment:

```
source venv/bin/activate
```

Run the tests:

```
python -m pytest
```

(don't use `pytest` bin directly, since we require pypath)

## Implementation notes

### Decorators

Python supports higher-order functions. That is functions can accept and return other functions.
In the following example, `say_hello()` accepts another function

```py
def say_hello(func):
  print(f"Hello, {func()}")

def alice():
  return "Alice"

say_hello(alice) # Prints "Hello, Alice"
```

Decorators provide syntactic sugar around this type of higher-order function manipulation.
Here's the same example implemented as a decorator.

```py
def say_hello(func):
  def wrapper():
    print(f"Hello, {func()}")
  return wrapper

@say_hello
def alice():
  return "Alice"

alice() # Prints "Hello, Alice"
```

Here, `say_hello()` is a decorator function. When applied on another function it augments the
behavior of that function. It essentially replaces `alice()` in-place with `say_hello(alice)`.
Note that the result of `say_hello(alice)` in this case is a new `wrapper()` function.

Replacing functions in-place like above has some ugly consequences. For instance, inspecting
the replaced function with `print(alice)` yields the output
`<function say_hello.<locals>.wrapper at 0x107153430>` which exposes the internals of the
decorator. A more idiomatic way to do this is to implement the decorator using the utils
provided in the built-in `functools` API:

```py
import functools

def say_hello(func):
  @functools.wraps(func)
  def wrapper():
    print(f"Hello, {func()}")
  return wrapper

@say_hello
def alice():
  return "Alice"
```

This retains the original context information of the `alice()` function, and as a result
`print(alice)` will produce `<function alice at 0x103cb7430>`.

In this SDK we use decorators to add extra metadata to the functions implemented by developers.
Specifically, each decorator adds a new `firebase_metadata` property to developer's functions.
Later, our codegen tool will extract this metadata to generate the necessary manifest files
for deployment.

### Decorators with arguments

Consider the following decorator.

```py
def https(_func=None, *, min_instances=None, max_instances=None, memory_mb=None):
```

Here aguments after `*` are keyword-only arguments. That is they must be specified with
keywords (names) -- e.g. `min_instances=1`. Just passing the value `1` without the
keyword would result in an error.

In the above signature all the arguments are optional. Therefore a developer may apply
it without any arguments, or with some arguments. When applied without arguments, Python
will pass the target decorated function as `_func`. But when applied with one or more
arguments `_func` actually gets set to `None`. Therefore the decorator implementation
must explicitly handle both cases:

```py
if _func is None:
  return https_with_options

return https_with_options(_func)
```

Now consider the following decorator.

```py
def pubsub(*, topic, min_instances=None):
```

This also defines a decorator that requires 2 keyword arguments. But one of them (`topic`) is
defined without a default value making it a required argument. As a result, when applied, the
target decorated function never gets passed into this decorator. So we essentially have only
one case to handle:

```py
return pubsub_with_topic
```
